



dprive                                                          S. Sahib
Internet-Draft                                                  H. Zhang
Intended status: Informational                            Salesforce.com
Expires: 14 February 2021                                   S. Dickinson
                                                              Sinodun IT
                                                          13 August 2020


         Padding Considerations for DNS Zone Transfers-over-TLS
                        draft-ssahib-xot-padding

Abstract

   [I-D.draft-ietf-dprive-xfr-over-tls] specifies use of TLS to prevent
   zone content collection via passive monitoring of zone transfers.
   This document lists considerations for various padding policies and
   provides recommendations.

Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/ShivanKaul/draft-ssahib-xot-padding.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 14 February 2021.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2020 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Sahib, et al.           Expires 14 February 2021                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Padding Considerations for XoT          August 2020


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Conventions and Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  Padding for AXoT  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   4.  Padding for IXoT  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   7.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5

1.  Introduction

   TODO

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Padding for AXoT

   As mentioned in [I-D.draft-ietf-dprive-xfr-over-tls], the goal of
   padding AXoT responses would be two fold:

   *  to obfuscate the actual size of the transferred zone to minimize
      information leakage about the entire contents of the zone.

   *  to obfuscate the incremental changes to the zone between SOA
      updates to minimize information leakage about zone update activity
      and growth.

   A simplistic option, following the premise of the Block-Length
   Padding strategy recommended in [RFC8467], would be to specify




Sahib, et al.           Expires 14 February 2021                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Padding Considerations for XoT          August 2020


   a 'message size' to which each individual AXFR response would always
   be padded (with a maximum value of 65353 bytes) and a compatible
   'zone block size' for a zone to which the sum total of all the AXFR
   responses should be padded.  This could equivalently be specified as
   a 'zone number of AXFR responses block size'.  Primary
   implementations SHOULD provide a configurable block-size based
   padding mechanism.

   This second requirement is likely to require an implementation to
   create 'empty' AXFR responses in order to pad a zone to the zone
   block size.  That is, AXFR responses that contain no RRs apart from
   the EDNS(0) option for padding.  However, as will existing AXFR, the
   last message sent MUST contain the same SOA that was in the first
   message of the AXFR response series in order to signal the conclusion
   of the zone transfer.

   [RFC5936] says:

   "Each AXFR response message SHOULD contain a sufficient number of RRs
   to reasonably amortize the per-message overhead, up to the largest
   number that will fit within a DNS message (taking the required
   content of the other sections into account, as described below)."
   'Empty' AXoT responses generated in order to meet a padding
   requirement are exempt from the above statement.  Secondary
   implementations MUST be resilient to receiving padded AXFR responses
   including 'empty' AXFR response that contain only padding.

   Observation of the zone transfers would then reveal only zone block
   size step changes in the total zone size (if the zone size changed
   sufficiently) obfuscating the smaller fluctuations.

   Choosing a message size of less than 65535 only really makes sense
   for small zones that can be transferred in a single response (in
   which case the zone block size can be set to the same value).
   Choosing a zone block size close to the current zone size would
   provide some protection with a minimal overhead.  Choosing a zone
   block size much larger than the current zone size would provide
   increased protection but with increased overhead.

   As with any padding strategy the trade-off between increased
   bandwidth and processing due to the larger size and number of padded
   DNS messages and the corresponding gain in confidentiality must be
   carefully considered.

   As noted in [RFC8467], the maximum message length, as dictated by the
   protocol, limits the space for EDNS(0) options.  Since padding will
   reduce the message space available to other EDNS(0) options, the
   "Padding" option MUST be the last EDNS(0) option applied before a DNS



Sahib, et al.           Expires 14 February 2021                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Padding Considerations for XoT          August 2020


   message is sent.  In particular for AXFR, that means that if the
   message is to be signed with, e.g., TSIG this must be done before the
   padding is applied.

4.  Padding for IXoT

   As mentioned in [I-D.draft-ietf-dprive-xfr-over-tls], the goal of
   padding IXoT responses is to minimize leakage about zone update
   activity through the size and timing of responses.

   The frequency of IXFR is affected by if and how the zone is DNSSEC
   signed.  For example, both the following zones might see frequent
   similarly sized IXFR exchanges

   *  a small DNSSEC signed zone with frequent record updates

   *  a large DNSSEC signed zone that receives no updates but the RRSIG
      signature expiry dates are jittered across the signature lifetime
      window

   A simplistic option, following the premise of the Block-Length
   Padding strategy recommended in [@RFC8467], would be to specify

   *  a 'message block size' where each individual IXFR response would
      always be padded to the closest multiple of that number of bytes
      (with a maximum value of 65353 bytes)

   Choosing a message block size of less than 65535 will expose some
   information about zone activity but obfuscate the more granular
   changes.

   As with any padding strategy the trade-off between increased
   bandwidth and processing due to the larger size and number of padded
   DNS messages and the corresponding gain in confidentiality must be
   carefully considered.  For IXFR a detailed understanding of the zone
   contents and transfer pattern is likely to be required in order to
   select the optimal block size for a zone.

   Primary implementations SHOULD provide a configurable message block
   size based padding mechanism.  As noted in [@RFC8467], the maximum
   message length, as dictated by the protocol, limits the space for
   EDNS(0) options.  Since padding will reduce the message space
   available to other EDNS(0) options, the "Padding" option MUST be the
   last EDNS(0) option applied before a DNS message is sent.  In
   particular for AXFR, that means that if the message is to be signed
   with, e.g., TSIG this must be done before the padding is applied.





Sahib, et al.           Expires 14 February 2021                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Padding Considerations for XoT          August 2020


5.  Security Considerations

   TODO Security

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

7.  Normative References

   [I-D.draft-ietf-dprive-xfr-over-tls]
              Toorop, W., Dickinson, S., Sahib, S., Aras, P., and A.
              Mankin, "DNS Zone Transfer-over-TLS", 2020,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-dprive-xfr-
              over-tls>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Authors' Addresses

   Shivan Sahib
   Salesforce.com

   Email: ssahib@salesforce.com


   Han Zhang
   Salesforce.com

   Email: hzhang@salesforce.com


   Sara Dickinson
   Sinodun IT

   Email: sara@sinodun.com




Sahib, et al.           Expires 14 February 2021                [Page 5]
